.TH RESCAN\-SCSI\-BUS.SH "1" "July 2018" "rescan\-scsi\-bus.sh" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rescan-scsi-bus.sh \- script to add and remove SCSI devices without rebooting
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rescan\-scsi\-bus.sh
[\fI\-\-alltargets\fR] [\fI\-\-attachpq3\fR] [\fI\-c\fR]
[\fI\-\--channels=CLIST\fR] [\fI\-\-color\fR] [\fI\-d\fR] [\fI\-\-flush\fR]
[\fI\-f\fR] [\fI\-\-forceremove\fR] [\fI\-\-forcerescan\fR] [\fI\-\-help\fR]
[\fI\-\-hosts=HLIST\fR] [\fI\-\-ids=TLIST\fR] [\fI\-\-ignore\-rev\fR]
[\fI\-\-issue\-lip\fR] [\fI\-i\fR] [\fI\-\-issue\-lip\-wait=SECS\fR] [\fI\-I SECS\fR]
[\fI\-l\fR]
[\fI\-L NUM\fR] [\fI\-\-largelun\fR] [\fI\-\-luns=LLIST\fR] [\fI\-m\fR]
[\fI\-\-multipath\fR] [\fI\-\-nooptscan\fR] [\fI\-\-nosync\fR]
[\fI\-\-remove\fR] [\fI\-\-removelun2\fR] [\fI\-\-resize\fR]
[\fI\-\-sparselun\fR] [\fI\-\-sync\fR] [\fI\-\-update\fR] [\fI\-\-version\fR]
[\fI\-\-wide\fR] [\fIHOST1 \fR[\fIHOST2 \fR...]]
.SH OPTIONS
Option are ordered by their long name. Those without a long name are ordered
as if their single letter was a long name.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-alltargets\fR
scan all targets, not just currently existing [default: disabled]
.TP
\fB\-\-attachpq3\fR
tell kernel to attach sg to LUN 0 that reports PQ=3
.TP
\fB\-c\fR
enables scanning of channels 0 1   [default: 0 / all detected ones]
.TP
\fB\-\-channels\fR=\fICLIST\fR
scan only channel(s) in \fICLIST\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-color\fR
use coloured prefixes OLD/NEW/DEL
.TP
\fB\-d\fR
enable debug                       [default: 0]
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-flush\fR
flush failed multipath devices     [default: disabled]
.TP
\fB\-\-forceremove\fR
remove stale devices (DANGEROUS)
.TP
\fB\-\-forcerescan\fR
remove and readd existing devices (DANGEROUS)
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
print usage message then exit
.TP
\fB\-\-hosts\fR=\fIHLIST\fR
scan only host(s) in \fIHLIST\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-ids\fR=\fITLIST\fR
scan only target ID(s) in \fITLIST\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-ignore\-rev\fR
ignore (firmware) revision change. This is the third text field (4 bytes
long) in a standard INQUIRY response.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-issue\-lip\fR
issue a FibreChannel LIP reset     [default: disabled]
.TP
\fB\-I SECS\fR, \fB\-\-issue\-lip\-wait=SECS\fR
issue a FibreChannel LIP reset and then wait SECS seconds.
.TP
\fB\-L\fR NUM
activates scanning for LUNs 0\-\-NUM [default: 0]
.TP
\fB\-l\fR
activates scanning for LUNs 0\-\-7   [default: 0]
.TP
\fB\-\-largelun\fR
tell kernel to support LUNs > 7 even on SCSI2 devs
.TP
\fB\-\-luns\fR=\fINLIST\fR
scan only lun(s) in \fINLIST\fR
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-multipath\fR
update multipath devices           [default: disabled]
.TP
\fB\-\-nooptscan\fR
don't stop looking for LUNs is 0 is not found
.TP
\fB\-\-nosync\fR
do not issue a sync [default: sync if remove]
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-remove\fR
enables removing of devices        [default: disabled]
.TP
\fB\-\-reportlun2\fR
tell kernel to try REPORT_LUN even on SCSI2 devices
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-resize\fR
look for resized disks and reload associated multipath devices, if applicable
.TP
\fB\-\-sparselun\fR
tell kernel to support sparse LUN numbering
.TP
\fB\-\-sync\fR
issue a sync [default: sync if remove]
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-update\fR
look for existing disks that have been remapped
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
shows version string then exits. The version string is a numeric datestamp
of the form YYYYMMDD.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-wide\fR
scan for target device IDs 0\-\-15   [default: 0\-\-7]
.IP
Host numbers may thus be specified either directly on cmd line (deprecated)
or with the \fB\-\-hosts\fR=\fILIST\fR parameter (recommended).
.PP
Arguments to options that end in \fILIST\fR (e.g. \fITLIST\fR) can have this
form:
.br
    A[\-B][,C[\-D]]...
.br
which is a comma separated list of single values and/or ranges (no spaces
allowed).
.SH SEE ALSO
There is a brief descripion here:
http://fibrevillage.com/storage/585-rescan-scsi-bus-sh-script-for-adding-and-removing-scsi-devices-without-rebooting
.PP
\fBsg3_utils\fR Homepage: \fBhttp://sg.danny.cz/sg\fR
