.TH SCSI_SATL "8" "May 2013" "sg3_utils\-1.36" SG3_UTILS
.SH NAME
scsi_satl \- check SCSI to ATA Translation (SAT) device support
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B scsi_satl
[\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-log\fR] [\fI\-\-quiet\fR] [\fI\-\-verbose\fR]
\fIDEVICE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
This bash shell script calls several SCSI commands on the given
\fIDEVICE\fR that is assumed to be an ATA device behind a SCSI
to ATA Translation (SAT) layer (SATL). The results of each test
and a pass/fail count are output.
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
print out the usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-log\fR
the output to stderr (from each SCSI command executed) is appended to
a file called 'scsi_satl.err' in the current working directory.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
the amount of output is reduced and typically only the pass/fail
count is output.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
increase level or verbosity.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of this script is the number of "bad" errors found.
So an exit status of 0 means all mandatory SCSI commands worked as
expected.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by D. Gilbert
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2011\-2013 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B sg_inq, sg_luns, sg_turs, sg_requests, sg_vpd, sg_senddiag, sg_modes,
.B sg_sat_identify (sg3_utils)
