.TH SCSI_LOGGING_LEVEL "8" "May 2013" "sg3_utils\-1.36" SG3_UTILS
.SH NAME
scsi_logging_level \- access Linux SCSI logging level information
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B scsi_logging_level
[\fI\-\-all=LEV\fR] [\fI\-\-create\fR] [\fI\-\-error=LEV\fR] [\fI\-\-get\fR]
[\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-highlevel=LEV\fR] [\fI\-\-hlcomplete=LEV\fR]
[\fI\-\-hlqueue=LEV\fR] [\fI\-\-ioctl=LEV\fR] [\fI\-\-llcomplete=LEV\fR]
[\fI\-\-llqueue=LEV\fR] [\fI\-\-lowlevel=LEV\fR] [\fI\-\-midlevel=LEV\fR]
[\fI\-\-mlcomplete=LEV\fR] [\fI\-\-mlqueue=LEV\fR] [\fI\-\-scan=LEV\fR]
[\fI\-\-set\fR] [\fI\-\-timeout=LEV\fR] [\fI\-\-version\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
This bash shell script accesses the Linux SCSI subsystem logging
level. The current values can be shown (e.g. with \fI\-\-get\fR)
or changed (e.g. with \fI\-\-set\fR). Superuser permissions will
typically be required to set the logging level.
.PP
One of these options: \fI\-\-create\fR, \fI\-\-get\fR or \fI\-\-set\fR
is required. Only one can be given.
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-all\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is used for all SCSI_LOG fields.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-create\fR
Options are parsed and placed in internal fields that are displayed but
no logging levels are changed within the Linux kernel.
.TP
\fB\-E\fR, \fB\-\-error\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_ERROR field.
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-get\fR
Fetches the current SCSI logging levels from the Linux kernel and
displays them.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
print out the usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-highlevel\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_HLQUEUE and SCSI_LOG_HLCOMPLETE fields.
.TP
\fB\-\-hlcomplete\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_HLCOMPLETE field.
.TP
\fB\-\-hlqueue\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_HLQUEUE field.
.TP
\fB\-I\fR, \fB\-\-ioctl\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_IOCTL field.
.TP
\fB\-\-llcomplete\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_LLCOMPLETE field.
.TP
\fB\-\-llqueue\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_LLQUEUE field.
.TP
\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-lowlevel\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_LLQUEUE and SCSI_LOG_LLCOMPLETE fields.
.TP
\fB\-M\fR, \fB\-\-midlevel\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_MLQUEUE and SCSI_LOG_MLCOMPLETE fields.
.TP
\fB\-\-mlcomplete\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_MLCOMPLETE field.
.TP
\fB\-\-mlqueue\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_MLQUEUE field.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-scan\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_SCAN field.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-set\fR
Uses the fields specified in this command's options and attempts to
apply them to the Linux SCSI subsystem logging levels. Typically superuser
permissions will be required to do this.
.TP
\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-timeout\fR=\fILEV\fR
\fILEV\fR is placed in the SCSI_LOG_TIMEOUT field.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Outputs the version information and then exits.
.SH NOTES
The \fI\-\-get\fR and \fI\-\-set\fR options access the
/proc/sys/dev/scsi/logging_level pseudo file.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of this script is 0 when it is successful. Any other
exit status indicates that an error has occurred.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by IBM. Small alterations by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co IBM Corp. 2006
.br
This software is distributed under the GPL version 2. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.PP
The software was obtained from an IBM package called s390\-tools\-1.6.2
found on that company's "developerworks" site. The most recent version of
that package at this time is 1.8.3 .
