.TH SG_RTPG "8" "May 2014" "sg3_utils\-1.39" SG3_UTILS
.SH NAME
sg_rtpg \- send SCSI REPORT TARGET PORT GROUPS command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sg_rtpg
[\fI\-\-decode\fR] [\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-hex\fR] [\fI\-\-raw\fR]
[\fI\-\-readonly\fR] [\fI\-\-verbose\fR] [\fI\-\-version\fR] \fIDEVICE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Send a SCSI REPORT TARGET PORT GROUPS command to \fIDEVICE\fR and
outputs the response.
.PP
Target port group access is described in SPC\-3 and SPC\-4 found at
www.t10.org . The most recent draft of SPC\-4 is revision 37 in which
target port groups are described in section 5.15 .
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-decode\fR
decodes the status code and asymmetric access state from each
target port group descriptor returned. The default action is not
to decode these values.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-extended\fR
use extended header format for parameter data. This sets the PARAMETER DATA
FORMAT field in the cdb to 1.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
output the usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-hex\fR
output response in hex (rather than partially or fully decode it).
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-raw\fR
output response in binary to stdout.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-readonly\fR
open the \fIDEVICE\fR read\-only (e.g. in Unix with the O_RDONLY flag).
The default is to open it read\-write.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output).
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.SH NOTES
The Report Target Port Groups command should be supported whenever the TPGS
bits in a standard INQUIRY response are greater than zero. [View with
sg_inq utility.]
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of sg_rtpg is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise see
the sg3_utils(8) man page.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2004\-2014 Christophe Varoqui and Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B sg_inq(sg3_utils)
