.TH SG_REP_PIP "8" "July 2020" "sg3_utils\-1.46" SG3_UTILS
.SH NAME
sg_rep_pip \- send SCSI REPORT PROVISIONING INITIALIZATION PATTERN command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sg_rep_pip
[\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-hex\fR] [\fI\-\-maxlen=LEN\fR] [\fI\-\-raw\fR]
[\fI\-\-readonly\fR] [\fI\-\-verbose\fR] [\fI\-\-version\fR]
\fIDEVICE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Sends a SCSI REPORT PROVISIONING INITIALIZATION PATTERN command to
\fIDEVICE\fR and outputs the data returned. This command is found in the
SBC\-4 draft standard, revision 21 (sbc\4r21.pdf).
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
output the usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-hex\fR
output the response in hexadecimal to stdout. When used once the whole
response is output in ASCII hexadecimal, prefixed by an address (starting at
0) on each line. When used twice the whole response is output in hexadecimal
with no leading address (on each line). The default action is the same as
giving the \fI\-\-hex\fR option once.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-maxlen\fR=\fILEN\fR
where \fILEN\fR is the (maximum) response length in bytes. It is placed in
the cdb's "allocation length" field. If not given (or \fILEN\fR is zero)
then 8192 is used. The maximum allowed value of \fILEN\fR is 1048576.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-raw\fR
output the SCSI response (i.e. the data\-out buffer) in binary (to stdout).
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-readonly\fR
open the \fIDEVICE\fR read\-only (e.g. in Unix with the O_RDONLY flag).
The default is to open it read\-write.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output).
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of sg_rep_pip is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise see
the sg3_utils(8) man page.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2020 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B sg3_utils(sg3_utils)
