.TH SG_RESET_WP "8" "May 2018" "sg3_utils\-1.43" SG3_UTILS
.SH NAME
sg_reset_wp \- send SCSI RESET WRITE POINTER command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sg_reset_wp
[\fI\-\-all\fR] [\fI\-\-count=ZC\fR] [\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-verbose\fR]
[\fI\-\-version\fR] [\fI\-\-zone=ID\fR] \fIDEVICE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Sends a SCSI RESET WRITE POINTER command to the \fIDEVICE\fR. This command
is found in the soon to be released ZBC standard (draft prior to standard:
zbc\-r05.pdf).
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-all\fR
sets the ALL field in the cdb. This causes a reset write pointer operation of
all open zones and full zones. When this option is given then the
\fI\-\-zone=ID\fR option is ignored. Either this option or the
\fI\-\-zone=ID\fR option is required.
.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-count\fR=\fIZC\fR
ZC is placed in the Zone Count field in the cdb of the RESET WRITE POINTER
command supported by this utility. ZC should be a value from 0 to
65535 (0xffff) inclusive.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
output the usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output).
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.TP
\fB\-z\fR, \fB\-\-zone\fR=\fIID\fR
where \fIID\fR is placed in the cdb's ZONE ID field. A zone id is a zone
start logical block address (LBA). This causes a reset write pointer
operation on the zone identified by the ZONE ID field. The default value is
0. Either this option or the \fI\-\-all\fR option is required.
\fIID\fR is assumed to be in decimal unless prefixed with '0x' or has a
trailing 'h' which indicate hexadecimal.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of sg_reset_wp is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise see
the sg3_utils(8) man page.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2014\-2018 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B sg_rep_zones,sg_zone(sg3_utils)
