.TH SG_RMSN "8" "February 2011" "sg3_utils\-1.31" SG3_UTILS
.SH NAME
sg_rmsn \- sends a SCSI READ MEDIA SERIAL NUMBER command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sg_rmsn
[\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-raw\fR] [\fI\-\-readonly\fR] [\fI\-\-verbose\fR]
[\fI\-\-version\fR]
\fIDEVICE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Send a SCSI READ MEDIA SERIAL NUMBER command to \fIDEVICE\fR and outputs
the response.
.PP
This command is described in SPC\-3 found at www.t10.org . It was originally
added to SPC\-3 in revision 11 (2003/2/12). It is not an mandatory command
and the author has not seen any SCSI devices that support it.
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
output the usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-raw\fR
sends the serial number (if found) to stdout. This output may contain
non\-printable characters (e.g. the serial number is padded with NULLs
at the end so its length is a multiple of 4). The default action is
to print the serial number out in ASCII\-HEX with ASCII characters to
the right. All error messages are sent to stderr.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-readonly\fR
opens the DEVICE read\-only rather than read\-write which is the
default. The Linux sg driver needs read\-write access for the SCSI
READ MEDIA SERIAL NUMBER command but other access methods may require
read\-only access.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output).
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.SH NOTES
Device identification information is also found in a standard INQUIRY
response and its VPD pages (see sg_vpd). The relevant VPD pages are
the "device identification page" (VPD page 0x83) and the "unit serial
number" page (VPD page 0x80).
.PP
The MMC\-4 command set for CD/DVD/HD-DVD/BD drives has a "media serial number"
feature (0x109) [and a "logical unit serial number" feature]. These
can be viewed with sg_get_config.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of sg_rmsn is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise see
the sg3_utils(8) man page.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2005\-2011 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B sg_vpd(sg3_utils), sg_get_config(sg3_utils)
