.TH SG_REFERRALS "8" "November 2012" "sg3_utils\-1.35" SG3_UTILS
.SH NAME
sg_referrals \- send SCSI REPORT REFERRALS command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sg_referrals
[\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-hex\fR] [\fI\-\-lba=LBA\fR] [\fI\-\-maxlen=LEN\fR]
[\fI\-\-one-segment\fR] [\fI\-\-raw\fR] [\fI\-\-verbose\fR]
[\fI\-\-version\fR] \fIDEVICE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Send the SCSI REPORT REFERRALS command to the \fIDEVICE\fR and outputs the
response. This command was introduced in (draft) SBC\-3 revision 24 and
devices that support referrals should support this command.
.PP
The default action is to decode the response for all user data segment
referral descriptors. The amount of output can be reduced by the 
\fI\-\-lba\fR and \fI\-\-one-segment\fR options.
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
output the usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-hex\fR
output response to this command in ASCII hex.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-lba\fR=\fILBA\fR
where \fILBA\fR is the Logical Block Address (LBA) in the first user
data segment the \fIDEVICE\fR should report the referrals parameter
data for.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-maxlen\fR=\fILEN\fR
where \fILEN\fR is the (maximum) response length in bytes. It is placed in
the cdb's "allocation length" field. If not given then 256 is used. 256 is
enough space for the response header and user data segment descriptors.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-one-segment\fR
report the user data segment of the segment spefified by the \fILBA\fR
parameter only.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-raw\fR
output response in binary (to stdout).
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output). Additional output
caused by this option is sent to stderr.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.SH NOTES
For a discussion of referrals see section 4.25 of sbc3r25.pdf
at http://www.t10.org (or the corresponding section of a later draft).
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of sg_referrals is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise
see the sg3_utils(8) man page.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert and Hannes Reinecke.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2009\-2012 Douglas Gilbert and Hannes Reinecke
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B sg_vpd(8)
