.TH SG_READ_BLOCK_LIMITS "8" "November 2022" "sg3_utils\-1.48" SG3_UTILS
.SH NAME
sg_read_block_limits \- send SCSI READ BLOCK LIMITS command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sg_read_block_limits
[\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-hex\fR] [--mloi] [\fI\-\-raw\fR]
[\fI\-\-readonly\fR] [\fI\-\-verbose\fR] [\fI\-\-version\fR]
\fIDEVICE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Send a SCSI READ BLOCK LIMITS command to \fIDEVICE\fR and outputs the
response. This command is defined for tape (drives) and its description
is found in the SSC documents at https://www.t10.org .
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
output the usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-hex\fR
output response in hex (rather than decode it).
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-mloi\fR
sets the MLOI bit in the READ BLOCK LIMITS command and if that
succeeds, prints out the Maximum Logical Object Identifier (MLOI)
value. The MLOI bit was introduced in the ssc4r02.pdf draft.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-raw\fR
output response in binary to stdout.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-readonly\fR
open \fIDEVICE\fR in read\-only mode. The default is to open it in
read\-write mode.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output).
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of sg_read_block_limits is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise
see the sg3_utils(8) man page.
.SH EXAMPLES
It is usually okay to use no options. Here is an invocation (on the first
line following the "#" command prompt) followed by some typical output:
.PP
   # sg_read_block_limits /dev/st0
.br
Read Block Limits results:
.br
    Minimum block size: 1 byte(s)
.br
    Maximum block size: 16777215 byte(s), 16383 KB, 15 MB
.br
    Granularity: 0
.br
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2009\-2022 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a BSD\-2\-Clause license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B sg3_utils(sg3_utils)
